--- PAGE 1 ---
npj | computational materials
Article
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-024-01316-4
Structure-based out-of-distribution (OOD)
materials property prediction: a
benchmark study
Check for updates
Sadman Sadeed Omee
1, Nihang Fu1, Rongzhi Dong
1, Ming Hu
2
& Jianjun Hu
1
In real-world materials research, machine learning (ML) models are usually expected to predict and
discover novel exceptional materials that deviate from the known materials. It is thus a pressing
questionto provide an objective evaluation of ML modelperformancesin property prediction of out-of-
distribution (OOD) materials that are different from the training set. Traditional performance evaluation
of materials property prediction models through the random splitting of the dataset frequently results
in artiﬁcially high-performance assessments due to the inherent redundancy of typical material
datasets. Here we present a comprehensive benchmark study of structure-based graph neural
networks (GNNs) for extrapolative OOD materials property prediction. We formulate ﬁve different
categories of OOD ML problems for three benchmark datasets from the MatBench study. Our
extensive experiments show that current state-of-the-art GNN algorithms signiﬁcantly underperform
for the OOD property prediction tasks on average compared to their baselines in the MatBench study,
demonstrating a crucial generalization gap in realistic material prediction tasks. We further examine
the latent physical spaces of these GNN models and identify the sources of CGCNN, ALIGNN, and
DeeperGATGNN’s signiﬁcantly more robust OOD performance than those of the current best models
in the MatBench study (coGN and coNGN) as a case study for the perovskites dataset, and provide
insights to improve their performance.
Machine learning (ML)-based models have swiftly emerged as the state-of-
the-art (SOTA) performers in a wide range of materials informatics pro-
blems
such
as
materials
property
prediction1–7,
crystal
structure
prediction8–12, material generation13–16, high-throughput screening17,18, and
inverse design of materials19,20. Among these, one of the most exciting
applications of ML-based models is to predict various properties of mate-
rials given their compositions, or structures. Composition-based ML
models have shown limited prediction performance21–23, as most material
properties are highly dependent on their crystal structures. Recent research
has demonstrated that structure-based deep learning (DL) models can
achieve signiﬁcantly better accuracy in predicting materials properties
compared to methods that exclusively rely on composition descriptors24–26.
Especially, graph neural network (GNN) models have been widely utilized
for this purpose due to their demonstrated superior effectiveness in this
task3,4,24,27,28. This is because GNNs excel at capturing the local environment
of each atom by considering its neighboring atoms and their interactions,
which is crucial in determining the macro-properties of a material29–33.
Several benchmark studies have been conducted to evaluate the per-
formances of existing ML methods24,26,34,35. Fung et al.24 presented a com-
prehensive benchmark of SOTA GNN models evaluated across multiple
diverse problems, while Varivoda et al.35 presented a benchmark study of
ML models for property prediction with uncertainty quantiﬁcation. Both
benchmarks overlooked the inclusion of OODtest sets, compromising their
applicability for real-world materials property prediction. Dunn et al.26
presented the Matbench benchmark test suite and an automated procedure
for evaluating ML models for predicting material properties. This bench-
mark contains nine distinct structure-based property prediction tasks.
Remarkably, the SOTA GNN model coGN36 has consistently demonstrated
superior performance with an MAE of 0.017 eV for formation energy
prediction and 0.156 eV for bandgap prediction, while the top positions on
the leaderboard37 for all nine tasks are all secured by structure-based GNN
models. However, the excellent performances of these GNN models are
overestimated, as veriﬁed by our work. We ﬁnd that the reported superior
performancesofSOTAmodelsintheMatBenchstudyoriginatedfromtheir
1Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC, USA. 2Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of South
Carolina, Columbia, SC, USA.
e-mail: hu@sc.edu; jianjunh@cse.sc.edu
npj Computational Materials |  (2024) 10:144
1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;


--- PAGE 2 ---
performanceevaluationmethod,inwhichanentiredatasetisrandomlysplit
into ﬁve training and test folds leading to high similarity between both sets
due to the high sample redundancy of materials databases38. This dataset
redundancy in material databases such as ICSD39, Materials Project40,
OQMD41, and AFLOW42, is caused by the historical iterative tinkering
process of experimental material discovery and accumulation, which tends
to generate many materials with high similarity. Moreover, studies have
revealed that current ML models have low generalization performance on
material datasets for test samples with different data distributions, and their
performances are frequently overestimated because of high dataset
redundancy34,38,43–45. Li et al.44 discovered that ML models trained on
Materials Project 2018 data may experience a signiﬁcant decline in per-
formance when applied to new materials introduced in Materials Project
2021 data, primarily due to a shift in data distribution. Consequently, the
resulting high prediction performance over these test sets in Matbench
assumed homogeneity in terms of composition, structure, or properties and
was randomly distributed within the entire dataset space. This material
property performance evaluation approach, guided by the assumption of
independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) data, proved inadequate in
replicating their performance in real-world material discovery applications.
In practical scenarios, ML models are often utilized to discover or screen
outlier materials that deviate from the distribution of the training set and
need their property to be predicted. Moreover, in real-world situations,
researchers commonly are more interested in a limited number of outlier
materials that are different from the known material compositions or
structures, referred to as OOD materials. These materials could be located in
a chemical space with limited known counterparts, or they might display
exceptionally high or low property values38. An evaluation of ML-based
material property prediction performance in these particular situations was
not provided in the MatBench study and in the literature to our knowledge.
Recently, within the domain of ML, researchers started to extensively
investigate OOD generalization resulting from changes in data distribution
between the original and target domains, primarily in the context of transfer
learning46, domain generalization47,48, causal learning49, and domain
adaptation50.Thisshiftindistributionisakeyconcernintheseareas.Mostof
these methods are still unexplored for improving the material property
prediction performancein OODmaterials. To our knowledge, there has not
been a comprehensive benchmark study of ML models for OOD property
prediction of inorganic materials in general. Another shortcoming of cur-
rent ML approaches for material property prediction is that the ML models
are usually trained without considering the distribution of the test set. In
practical materials property prediction tasks, the compositions or structures
of the targetmaterialsare alreadyavailable,whichcanbe and should be used
as guidance information for training better ML models for property pre-
diction of these target materials38. Furthermore, Schrier et al.51 highlighted
that material scientists usually prioritize investigating the properties of new
materials with unique compositions or characteristics, which frequently
gives rise to challenging OOD ML problems. This underscores the critical
need for a systematic investigation into the prediction problem of the
properties of OOD materials.
DuetothesheerdominanceofGNNsintheMatBenchstudy,thiswork
aims for a benchmark study for GNN-based OOD materials property
prediction. Our work is complementary to the benchmark study by Fung
et al.24 on GNNs’ performance on materials property prediction. However,
their analysis did not consider OOD materials as test sets. Although several
works have been done on the OOD topic in general48,52–54 including a similar
benchmark work55 for organic materials, a benchmark study of structure-
based GNNs for inorganic materials in general was highly warranted. Pre-
viousrelatedworks38,45,56,57docontainsomelevelofOODpredictionsforML
models, but no prior work does a complete benchmark study for inorganic
materials in general for structure-based GNNs and identiﬁes issues with
current popular benchmarks. Kauwe et al.56 tested only two simple ML
models (SVM and logistic regression) for a composition-based extrapola-
tion performance study. Xiong et al.34 provided only a single method to split
the data to identify outlier materials, whereas our current paper proposes
ﬁve different methods to generate outlier test sets (See the “OOD test set
generation” subsection). Additionally, they only experimented with one
GNN model, where we took account of eight different SOTA GNN models.
Meredig et al.45 provided two different methods for OOD target generation,
but their target generation methods are based solely on the elemental
composition of the materials and do not apply to structure-based models
which are the current SOTA performers. OC2057 and OC2258 both pre-
sented clearly deﬁned data-splitting methods (ID/OOD) for catalyst data-
sets. Not only they did not include the SOTA performing models for
materials property prediction in their benchmark (ALIGNN, Dee-
perGATGNN, coGN and coNGN) which makes their results prone to
criticism, they also did the benchmark with respect to catalyst datasets or for
the realmof catalysis,and notfor general inorganic materials.They sampled
their splits based on catalyst composition (ID: for those from the same
distribution as training, and OOD: for unseen catalyst compositions). They
did not provide any structure-based target set clustering like our work.
Moreover, they treated any data that is unseen (not in the dataset) as OOD,
whereas those OOD data can come from the same distribution as their ID
set, which is a big issue. Hu et al.38 proposed ﬁve target generation methods
based on composition-based descriptors. However, it failed to deﬁne a
method to generateOODtargetsfor evaluatingstructure-based ML models.
Our paper’s target generation method can handle structures of crystals by
incorporating structure-based descriptors such as OFM for the clustering,
which was missing from their work. Furthermore, none of the previous
studies systematically provided any insight regarding the current bottle-
necks of GNNs for OOD materials property prediction. Although
Choudhary and Sumpter59 demonstrated that a GNN model, once trained
solely on perfect materials, is capable of predicting vacancy formation
energies (Evac) in defective structures, eliminating the necessity for extra
training data, their ﬁndings are not generalized and tested across multiple
datasets, models, and target material properties. In response, we addressed
theselimitationsinourbenchmarkstudy.Inparticular,ourworkfocusedon
effectively predicting properties of minority or outlier material clusters that
exhibit different distributions compared to the training set. These scenarios
are characterized by the core issue of OOD ML. A general framework of our
benchmark study is presented in Fig. 1. Details about the datasets and the
OOD target generation methods can be found in the next section. Our
contributions are summarized as follows:
• We proposed a set of OOD material property prediction benchmark
problems for three datasets from the MatBench study, where each
category of OOD targets possesses unique characteristics, creating a
more realistic and complex challenge for current SOTA GNN
algorithms.
• Through comprehensive experiments on these OOD problems, we
benchmarked GNN algorithms for property prediction for these OOD
datasets. We showed that current GNN algorithms have limited gen-
eralization capabilities and are not well-suited for real-world OOD
material property prediction tasks, with the exception of a few cases. In
general, all the algorithms perform worse on average on the OOD test
problems than their baseline performance in the original MatBench
study, suggesting methods like domain adaptation are needed to
improve their OOD prediction performance.
• By delving into the physical latent spaces of the GNN models, we
identiﬁed possible reasons for the comparatively better performance of
CGCNN, ALIGNN, and DeeperGATGNN and the subpar perfor-
mance of the current top models in the MatBench leaderboard - coGN
and coNGN as a case study on the perovskites dataset.
Results
OOD benchmark problems, models and datasets
WeanalyzedeightGNNmodelsformaterialpropertyregressiontasksusing
three datasets sourced from MatBench26 and mentioned in Table 1. Details
about the GNN models can be found in the “Methods” section. The raw
dataset details are shown in Table 2. For simplicity, we refer to the mat-
bench_dielectric dataset as the ‘dielectric dataset’, the matbench_log_gvrh
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-024-01316-4
Article
npj Computational Materials |  (2024) 10:144
2


--- PAGE 3 ---
dataset as the ‘elasticity dataset’, and the matbench_perovskites dataset as
the ‘perovskites dataset’.
In realistic scenarios, the test set often deviates signiﬁcantly from the
training and validation set in terms of distribution. Rather than applying
conventional methods like random train-test splitting or k-fold cross-
validation(whichalsoreliesonrandomsplitting),weproposedﬁvepractical
scenarios for predicting material properties. These scenarios are designed to
focus on properties of less common or underrepresented materials in the
dataset,whichareoftenof particularinteresttomaterialresearcherswho are
more interested in discovering novel exceptional outlier materials. For each
rawdataset,weoutlinedﬁvemethods(seethenextsubsectionfordetails)for
selecting which samples from the sparse property or structure space will be
designated asthe target testsamples. Overall, each targetgeneration method
generates50clusters,whereeachclusterhasadifferentdistributionfromthe
others. As materials property prediction datasets are relatively small data-
sets, whereas the number of GNN parameters varies from ≈1.8–6 million,
we opted for a higher number of folds for our work. To efﬁcientlytrain these
GNN models, we need a decent amount of training samples. If we used a
small number of folds, then each model would have been trained on a
smallertrainingsetand tested ona largertest fold.Here,thepotentialfor the
data distribution in the test fold to differ from the training set will be bigger,
and we thus expect a higher prediction error on average60. In contrast, using
a highernumber of folds (≈30–50) means that each model will be trained on
a larger training set and tested on a smaller test fold which leads to a lower
prediction error as the models see more of the available data60. For each fold,
weselectedaclusterasthetestset,andtherestastrainingandvalidationsets,
and averaged the results over 50 folds to get the ﬁnal result.
OOD test set generation
In typical real-world scenarios, researchers are acquainted with their target
materials of interest, often lacking labeled samples. In this work, we speci-
ﬁcally concentrate on instances where the target set comprises no labeled
samples. Accordingly, we propose the following target set generation
Fig. 1 | The overall framework and workﬂow of our OOD materials benchmark.
First, we generate OOD test sets for the three datasets chosen, where we propose ﬁve
different methods to split each dataset into 50 folds, ensuring the test set varies in
distribution from the training set in each fold. Next, we perform preprocessing steps
such as input representation, data scaling, etc. for the GNNs. Subsequently, we train
the GNN models and compile the test set results. After that, we evaluate the per-
formance over the 50 folds for each OOD target generation method. We conduct
additional analyses on the obtained results, including investigating the physical
latent spaces of the GNN models to understand their characteristics in predicting the
properties of OOD materials.
Table 1 | List of the GNN models used in this work
GNN model
Source
Publishing year
CGCNN
Xie and Grossman1
2018
SchNet
Schütt et al.65
2018
MEGNet
Chen et al.2
2019
DimeNet++
Gasteiger et al.66
2020
ALIGNN
Choudhary and DeCost3
2021
DeeperGATGNN
Omee et al.4
2022
coGN
Ruff et al.36
2023
coNGN
Ruff et al.36
2023
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-024-01316-4
Article
npj Computational Materials |  (2024) 10:144
3


--- PAGE 4 ---
methods to simulate real-world conditions for materials property
prediction.
Leave-one-cluster-out (LOCO). Meredig et al.45 proposed this approach
in their assessment of the generalization performance of ML models for
predicting
material
properties.
Initially,
we
apply
the
k-means
algorithm61 based on the orbital-ﬁeld matrix (OFM) features62 to cluster
the whole dataset into 50 clusters. OFM captures the electronic structure
of materials by considering the orbitals’ interactions, which are funda-
mental to understanding the material’s properties, and easily inter-
pretable due to their physical basis63. The OFM features were calculated
fast using the MatMiner23 package. Subsequently, we evaluate the models’
performance by iteratively using each of the clusters as test sets. While
enhancing the widely employed random splitting method to mitigate
performance overestimation, it still incorporates all samples, especially
those located in densely redundant areas. This implies that it retains a
susceptibility to some degree of overestimation.
Single-point targets with the lowest structure density (SparseXsin-
gle). In this method, we begin by converting material structures into the
1024-dimension OFM feature space. Subsequently, we apply the
t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE)64 for dimension
reduction converting the OFM feature space to a 2D space (x-value).
Following this, we calculate the densityfor each data point inthe 2D space
and select 500 samples with the lowest density. The density was calculated
using Gaussian Kernel Density function of the t-SNE. We apply k-means
clustering on these chosen samples to convert them into 50 clusters.
Finally, we extract one sample from each cluster, yielding a test set with 50
target samples.
Single-point targets with the lowest property density (SparseY-
single). In this method, we follow the preprocessing method of Spar-
seXsingle, where all structures are converted into 1024-dimension OFM
features. Following this, we sort the samples based on their property
values (y-value). This process estimates the density of y-values using
kernel density estimation for each data point and picks the 500 samples
with the lowest density. Then we apply the k-means clustering to convert
these chosen samples to 50 clusters. From each cluster, we pick one
sample, obtaining our test set with 50 target samples.
Cluster targets with the lowest structure density (SparseXcluster).
This sparse cluster target set generation method is similar to the Spar-
seXsingle method. However, after k-means clustering, rather than
selecting just one sample, we extend the selection to include N nearest
neighbors for each chosen sample to form the target cluster. The process
of picking neighbors ensures that no sample is selected into multiple
target clusters with the neighbors determined by the Euclidean distance
of OFM features.
Cluster targets with the lowest property density (SparseYcluster).
This sparse cluster target set generation method closely resembles the
SparseYsingle method but with a notable distinction. Following k-means
clustering, instead of selecting a single sample, we expand the selection to
include N nearest neighbors for each chosen sample to create a target
cluster. The neighbor-picking process is conducted to prevent any sample
from being selected into multiple target clusters. The determination of
neighbors is based on the Euclidean distance of OFM features.
The distribution of the whole dielectric datasets and their different
target sets are shown in Fig. 2. Additionally, Supplementary Fig. 1 and 2
provide visualizations for the elasticity and perovskites datasets. It can be
observed that realistic target sets predominantly reside in sparser regions,
whereas commonly employed random splitting tends to align with dense
areas exhibiting a distribution akin to that of the training set. In total, we
prepared 3 datasets, the dielectric dataset, the elasticity dataset, and the
perovskites dataset, for the benchmark evaluations, and each of them
contains LOCO, SparseXsingle, SparseXcluster, SparseYsingle, and Spar-
seYcluster test sets for regression. The number of samples for each clusterof
these datasets is shown in Supplementary Tables 1, 2, and 3.
Performance comparison on OOD test sets
Here we report the OOD performance of selected GNN models for three
datasets. The training hyperparameters used for this benchmark study are
listed in the Supplementary Notes. The results of the dielectric dataset for
ﬁve different OOD target generation methods are summarized in Table 3.
For the LOCO generation method, we found that coNGN achieved the
SOTA OOD test results on the dielectric dataset (MAE: 0.4983), and coGN
performed the second best (MAE: 0.4984), showing a 3.11% better perfor-
mance than the third best model CGCNN (MAE: 0.5911). The other GNN
models(exceptDeeperGATGNN)performedsigniﬁcantlyworsethanthese
two for the LOCO targets, with DimeNet++ registeringthe highestMAE at
2.7720. This discrepancy in performance can be attributed to the fact that in
contrasttorandomtrain-testsplittingor cross-validation,theLOCO targets
tend to have different distributions compared to the training sets (refer to
Fig. 2b). This introduces increased complexity and challenges for conven-
tionalML/DLmodelssuchasMEGNetthatarewell-trainedtoachievegood
prediction performance on i.i.d. test sets. The OOD test sets for the Spar-
seXcluster and SparseYcluster datasets are formed through a two-step
process.Initially,50seedsampleswiththehighestsparsityintheOFMspace
are chosen. From these, 10 samples that are most similar to the seed samples
(depending on the x-axis or y-axis) are selected. The main goal for these
target generation methods is to evaluate the effectiveness of an ML/DL
algorithm to predict the properties without using closest neighbors. For the
SparseXcluster targets, coGN and coNGN achieved the best performances
on thedielectricdataset(MAE:0.5241and 0.5242,respectively), followed by
CGCNN with an MAE increase of ≈14.57% to 0.6006. However, for the
SparseYcluster targets, DeeperGATGNN achieved the SOTA MAE of
0.3959, which is 10.10% less than that of its closest model ALIGNN (MAE:
0.4359). The remaining models again displayed signiﬁcantly subpar per-
formance compared to these three models for SparseXcluster and Spar-
seYcluster targets. The single-point sparse X and sparse Y test sets are
distinctive because they consist of only one sample each, with all other
samples being utilized for training and validation. coGN and coNGN out-
performed all other models for the SparseXsingle targets (MAE: 0.5518 and
0.5519, respectively), with a staggering 44.18% decrease in MAE than the
second best performing model, CGCNN (MAE: 0.9888). For the SparseY-
single targets, ALIGNN achieved the lowest MAE (0.2513), which is slightly
better (8.75%) than its closest performer, DeeperGATGNN (MAE: 0.2733).
In contrast, other models were consistently outperformed by these three
models by a large margin for the single-point Sparse X and Y targets, with
SchNet achieving the highest MAE (3.9767) for SparseXsingle targets, and
DimeNet++ obtaining the highest MAE (2.5866)for SparseYsingle targets.
Table4showsthesummarizedresultsfor ﬁvetypesofOODtestsetson
the elasticity dataset. CGCNN achieved the SOTA MAE for both LOCO
(0.0585 log10(GPa)) and SparseXcluster (0.0499 log10(GPa)) targets, which
Table 2 | Details of the three benchmark datasets used in this work
Dataset
Target property
Total samples
Original source
MatBench best algorithm (MAE)
Unit
matbench_dielectric
Refractive index
4764
Materials Project40,70
MODNet71 (0.2711)
Unitless
matbench_log_gvrh
Shear modulus
10987
Materials Project40,70
coNGN36 (0.0670)
log10(GPa)
matbench_perovskites
Formation energy
18928
Castelli et al.72
coGN36 (0.0269)
eV/unit cell
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-024-01316-4
Article
npj Computational Materials |  (2024) 10:144
4


--- PAGE 5 ---
is signiﬁcantly better than the second best performing model ALIGNN
(MAE: 0.0974 log10(GPa), and 0.0834 log10(GPa), respectively) for both
these OOD targets (66.50%, and 67.13%, respectively). On the other hand,
ALIGNN achieved the SOTA MAEs on the rest of the OOD targets
(SparseYcluster: 0.0631 log10(GPa), SparseXsingle: 0.0853 log10(GPa), and
SparseYsingle: 0.0450 log10(GPa)). CGCNN performed the second best for
the SparseYcluster and SparseXsingle targets (MAE: 0.0752 log10(GPa), and
0.0895 log10(GPa), respectively), with an increase in MAE of 16.09%, and
4.92%, respectively, while DeeperGATGNN performed the second best for
the SparseYsingle targets (MAE: 0.0807 log10(GPa)) with a remarkable
79.33% increase in MAE. coGN and coNGN were outperformed by
CGCNN and ALIGNN on all ﬁve types of targets, while DeeperGATGNN
performed better than them on four out of ﬁve targets. Other models per-
formed consistently worse than CGCNN, ALIGNN, and DeeperGATGNN
on the elasticity dataset, with MEGNet registering the worst MAE for the
LOCO (1.4468 log10(GPa)), SparseXcluster (1.4113 log10(GPa)), and
SparseYcluster (1.5659 log10(GPa)) targets, DimeNet++ achieving the
worst MAE for the SparseXsingle targets (1.3214 log10(GPa)), and SchNet
Table 3| 50-foldcross-validation MAEs (unitless) of different GNN models onthe dielectric dataset forﬁve different types ofOOD
problems
Algorithm
LOCO
SparseXcluster
SparseXsingle
SparseYcluster
SparseYsingle
CGCNN
0.5144
0.6006
0.9888
0.5254
0.4777
MEGNet
2.6830
2.8044
3.8384
2.5918
2.5706
SchNet
2.7074
2.8368
3.9767
2.5988
2.5566
DimeNet++
2.7720
2.9378
3.8629
2.5947
2.5866
ALIGNN
0.8592
0.6953
1.5115
0.4359
0.2513
DeeperGATGNN
0.5911
1.4056
1.5755
0.3959
0.2733
coGN
0.4984
0.5241
0.5519
0.4673
0.3589
coNGN
0.4983
0.5242
0.5518
0.4674
0.3589
The best results and second best results are marked by bold letters and underlines, respectively
Fig. 2 | Distribution of standard cross-validation (CV) test set and ﬁve OOD test
sets using various target generation methods for the dielectric dataset. a 50-fold
CV (with random splitting) of the whole dielectric dataset with 4764 samples
represented by cross symbols with 50 different colors. b Leave-one-cluster-out target
(LOCO) clusters. c In SparseXsingle, 50 test samples are represented by cross
symbols with 50 different colors, and gray points represent the remaining samples.
d In SparseYsingle, 50 test samples are represented by cross symbols with 50 dif-
ferent colors, and gray points represent the remaining samples. e SparseXcluster
displays 50 test clusters represented by cross symbols with 50 different colors, and
gray points represent the remaining samples. f SparseYcluster displays 50 test
clusters represented by cross symbols with 50 different colors, and gray points
represent the remaining samples.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-024-01316-4
Article
npj Computational Materials |  (2024) 10:144
5


--- PAGE 6 ---
recording
the
poorest
MAE
for
the
SparseYsingle
targets
(1.4855 log10(GPa)).
Results on the perovskites dataset are summarized in Table 5. We can
ﬁnd that DeeperGATGNN outperformed all other algorithms for four out
of ﬁve OOD targets (MAEs - LOCO: 0.036 eV/unit cell, SparseXcluster:
0.0464 eV/unit cell, SparseYcluster: 0.0333 eV/unit cell, SparseXsingle:
0.0373 eV/unit cell), demonstrating superior performance on the per-
ovskitesdata. ALIGNN trailed its performance with a signiﬁcant increase in
MAE of 5.75%, 0.86%, 22.52%, and 2.40%, for the LOCO (MAE: 0.0386 eV/
unit cell), SparseXcluster (MAE: 0.0468 eV/unit cell), SparseYcluster (MAE:
0.0341 eV/unit cell), and SparseXsingle (MAE: 0.0457 eV/unit cell) targets,
respectively. ALIGNN achievedthe SOTA performance for the single-point
Sparse Y targets (MAE: 0.0243 eV/unit cell), outperforming Dee-
perGATGNN (MAE: 0.0259 eV/unit cell) by a slight margin (6.58%). coGN
and coNGN performed worse ALIGNN and DeeperGATGNN on all ﬁve
OOD targets, while CGCNN achieved lower MAE than them on four out of
ﬁvetargets.Allothermodelsdemonstrated theirsubparperformanceonthe
OOD perovskites data, with DimeNet++ achieving the highest MAEs for
LOCO (MAE: 1.4666 eV/unit cell), SparseXcluster (MAE: 1.4567 eV/unit
cell), and SparseXsingle targets (MAE: 1.5248 eV/unit cell), and SchNet
registering poorest MAEs for SparseYcluster (MAE: 1.4736 eV/unit cell),
and SparseYsingle (MAE: 1.5173 eV/unit cell) targets.
While the latest SOTA GNN models try to outperform each other by
achieving the best results on speciﬁc datasets as reported in the Matbench
study26, they often overﬁt the i.i.d. training datasets, which prevent them
from achieving good performance on the OOD test sets. CGCNN’s sim-
plicity and primitiveness overcome this issue as it carries less bias from its
design to perform well on OOD tests of some speciﬁc datasets (e.g., Mate-
rialsProject formation energy/ band-gap dataset, etc.). This is why it out-
performed all many SOTA GNN algorithms on several targets. However,
with the dataset size increasing, its performance started to lag behind
ALIGNN and DeeperGATGNN. ALIGNN’s SOTA performance can be
attributed to its line graph encoding used to incorporate the triplet feature
and the two-step edge-gated convolution operation. On the other hand,
DeeperGATGNN’s unique architecture based on a global attention
mechanism aided with differentiable group normalization and skip-
connection contributes to its overall SOTA performance on the per-
ovskitesdataset.NotwithstandingthatcoGNand coNGNachievedsuperior
resultsforthreecategoriesoftargetsonthedielectricdataset,overallitlagged
behind CGCNN, ALIGNN and DeeperGATGNN on average considering
15 different OOD targets across three datasets. Their line-graph (similar to
ALIGNN) and nested line graph-based architectures, better atom neigh-
borhood selection method, and the usage of asymmetric unit cell repre-
sentationcanbeattributedforthis.Butwiththeincreaseofdatasetsize,their
OOD performances deteriorated. But they outperformed the rest of the
algorithms (except the mentioned three GNNs) as they are also designed to
adapt well for some particular datasets. This indicates that OOD data
techniques, such as domain adaptation, are needed to alleviate their pre-
diction performance. Moreover, we found that MEGNet, SchNet, and
DimeNet++ achieved worse but similar OOD performances on all three
datasets, which demonstrates they are not suitable GNN models for making
OOD materials property predictions.
Although CGCNN, ALIGNN, and DeeperGATGNN displayed high
resilience in handling OOD test data (and coGN and coNGN only for the
dielectric dataset targets) across all datasets’ targets, their results are still
bottlenecked by poor results for a few test clusters. The fold-wise MAE plots
for these three algorithms on the dielectric dataset, elasticity dataset, and
perovskites dataset are presented in Fig. 3, Supplementary Fig. 3, and 4,
respectively. The distribution of the MAE for 50 folds/clusters showed that
only a few clusters are responsible for the overall MAE of each algorithm to
Table 4 | 50-fold cross-validation MAEs (log10(GPa)) of different GNN models on the elasticity dataset for ﬁve different types of
OOD problems
Algorithm
LOCO
SparseXcluster
SparseXsingle
SparseYcluster
SparseYsingle
CGCNN
0.0585
0.0499
0.0895
0.0752
0.0840
MEGNet
1.4468
1.4113
1.3099
1.5659
1.4491
SchNet
1.4065
1.3455
1.2363
1.5592
1.4855
DimeNet++
1.4242
1.3562
1.3214
1.5454
1.4828
ALIGNN
0.0974
0.0834
0.0853
0.0631
0.0450
DeeperGATGNN
0.1173
0.1109
0.1140
0.0858
0.0807
coGN
0.1017
0.1416
0.2919
0.0823
0.1852
coNGN
0.1019
0.1417
0.2918
0.0823
0.1853
The best results and second best results are marked by bold letters and underlines, respectively.
Table 5 | 50-fold cross-validation MAEs (eV/unit cell) of different GNN models on the perovskites dataset for ﬁve different types
of OOD problems
Algorithm
LOCO
SparseXcluster
SparseXsingle
SparseYcluster
SparseYsingle
CGCNN
0.0651
0.0839
0.0689
0.0740
0.0768
MEGNet
1.4654
1.4485
1.5005
1.4685
1.5048
SchNet
1.4644
1.4509
1.5133
1.4736
1.5173
DimeNet++
1.4666
1.4567
1.5248
1.4732
1.5148
ALIGNN
0.0386
0.0468
0.0457
0.0341
0.0243
DeeperGATGNN
0.0365
0.0464
0.0373
0.0333
0.0259
coGN
0.0631
0.1306
0.2199
0.0925
0.1884
coNGN
0.0632
0.1306
0.2200
0.0926
0.1886
The best results and second best results are marked by bold letters and underlines, respectively.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-024-01316-4
Article
npj Computational Materials |  (2024) 10:144
6


--- PAGE 7 ---
surge. We also ﬁnd that while ALIGNN achieves best or the second best
OOD performance on the dielectric datasets (Table 3), it can have sig-
niﬁcantlydegradedpredictionMAEsforafewOODtestsetsasshowninthe
highest peak in Fig. 3a–e. This analysis highlights speciﬁc areas where each
algorithm’s performance could be further optimized to enhance its overall
accuracy and reliability. The parity plots of CGCNN, coGN, and Dee-
perGATGNN’s prediction performance on the perovskites dataset are
plotted in Fig. 4 for the LOCO targets, and in Supplementary Figs. 5–8 for
the rest of the targets. These ﬁgures demonstrated superior OOD prediction
performance of DeeperGATGNN compared to CGCNN and coGN on the
perovskites dataset. For all categories of targets, DeeperGATGNN achieved
better prediction accuracy compared to CGCNN and coGN for non-OOD
samples, which is proportional to their prediction accuracy for the OOD
samples.
Performance comparison with MatBench SOTA performance
To investigate the issue of performance degradation of GNN models in
OOD material property prediction, we compared the MatBench SOTA
algorithms’ performance on the OOD datasets with those on the Matbench
study(Fig.5).The MatBench SOTA algorithmsand theirMAEsforall three
datasets in the Matbench study26 are listed in Table 2. We calculated the
performance changes (in percentage) from the MatBench SOTA MAE to
the MAE found for all ﬁve OOD target generation methods for each algo-
rithm. The goal of this analysis is to ﬁnd out the feasibility of current GNN
Fig. 3 | Distribution of the MAEs for each fold of CGCNN, ALIGNN, and Dee-
perGATGNN on the dielectric dataset. Distribution of the MAEs for each fold of
CGCNN, ALIGNN, and DeeperGATGNN on the dielectric dataset for (a) LOCO,
(b) SparseXcluster, (c) SparseYcluster, (d) SparseXsingle, and (e) SparseYsingle
OOD targets. It showed that a few folds/clusters are extremely difﬁcult to predict
with MAE values greater than 1.0, which lead to high variation in the models'
predictions.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-024-01316-4
Article
npj Computational Materials |  (2024) 10:144
7


--- PAGE 8 ---
algorithms for high-performance OOD materials property prediction. We
found that all models’ OOD performances are signiﬁcantly worse than their
SOTA results in MatBench, with degradation ranging from −0.83% to a
substantial -1366.87%. These results indicate the inadequacy of current
GNN algorithms for OOD property prediction for materials data. The only
exception found on the dielectric dataset is for the SparseYsingle targets,
where ALIGNN’s performance is found to be improved by 7.31%. On the
otherhand,MEGNet,SchNet,andDimeNet++performedtheworstwitha
performance change of >−750% for all ﬁve types of OOD targets. However,
judging from Fig. 5a, we observed that coGN and coNGN adapted the best
on average in the new OOD target-based predictions on the dielectric
dataset, but with no improvements over the MatBench SOTA results.
Similar comparison results on the elasticity dataset are shown in
Fig. 5b. Again, all the GNN algorithms exhibited their deﬁciency to
generalize, achieving the MAE increases for all algorithms across all
OOD test sets ranging from -12.24% to a remarkable -2237.23%.
Exception from these results are CGCNN’s outperforming the MAEs of
SOTA algorithms for LOCO and SparseXcluster targets (12.7%, and
25.51% improvement, respectively), and ALIGNN’s superior perfor-
mance for both the SparseYcluster and SparseYsingle targets (5.82%, and
32.82% improvement, respectively). The ﬁnding from this ﬁgure is that
with the increase of data from the dielectric dataset to the elasticity
dataset, the previously deteriorated results of MEGNet, SchNet, and
DimeNet++ became even more deteriorated with a notable perfor-
mance degradation of >−1500% for all ﬁve types of OOD targets.
However, DeeperGATGNN, CGCNN, and ALIGNN’s average perfor-
mance degradations on the elasticity dataset were lower than those of the
dielectric dataset.
Fig. 4 | Parity plots for both OOD and non-OOD samples for the LOCO target
generation method on the perovskites dataset. These show that DeeperGATGNN
has better performance (MAE: 0.0365 eV/unit cell, R2 score ≈0.96) on the non-OOD
samples compared to CGCNN (MAE: 0.0651 eV/unit cell, R2 score ≈0.90) and
coGN (MAE: 0.0631 eV/unit cell, R2 score ≈0.92), which is proportional to its better
OOD performance than the other two for the LOCO targets.
Fig. 5 | Performance comparison of different GNN models’ MAEs vs MatBench
SOTA MAEs. Performance comparison of different GNN models’ MAEs for all ﬁve
different types of OOD targets with the SOTA MAEs found in the MatBench study
on the (a) dielectric dataset, (b) elasticity dataset, and (c) perovskites dataset.
Although on average, all models' MAEs are signiﬁcantly higher than the SOTA
MAEs, CGCNN, ALIGNN, and DeeperGATGNN outperformed MatBench’s SOTA
results in some cases.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-024-01316-4
Article
npj Computational Materials |  (2024) 10:144
8


--- PAGE 9 ---
Finally, we showed the performance degradation on the perovskites
dataset of the MAEs for all MatBench SOTA algorithms by comparing the
OOD results in Fig. 5c and their i.i.d. performance in Table 2. We again
noticed that almost all algorithms’ performance is much worse than their
performance on the MatBench study, ranging from -23.84% to a staggering
-5568.31%. In contrast, ALIGNN and DeeperGATGNN outperformed the
previous SOTA MAE by 3.87%, and 9.73%, respectively, for the SparseY-
single targets. We observed that ALIGNN improved on all three datasets for
the SparseYsingle OOD targets, which demonstrated its fair generalization
capability for this type of OOD target. But considering all the OOD target
generation methods, none of the algorithms showed good generalization
capability on average, demonstrating the necessity for methods like domain
adaptation to improve the OOD prediction performance of current GNN
models.
Comparison of OOD performance with baseline i.i.d.
performance
Here we aim to check how the evaluated GNNs’ performances degrade
when changing their test sets fromi.i.d to OOD. The i.i.d. baseline MAEs for
all GNN algorithms can be found on the MatBench leaderboard37, while the
OOD test set performances on the dielectric, elasticity, and perovskites
datasetcanbefoundinTables3,4,and5,respectively.Thecomparisonofall
algorithms’ prediction performances for all ﬁve OOD targets with their i.i.d.
baseline MAEs in the MatBench study on the dielectric dataset are shown in
Fig. 6a. We limited the maximumvalue of y-axis to 3 forbetter visualization.
We found that OOD MAEs of MEGNet, SchNet, DimeNet++, coGN, and
coNGN are signiﬁcantly worse than their i.i.d. baseline MAEs for all OOD
target sets, which proved their inadequate prediction capabilities on OOD
datasets. However, CGCNN was found to be most beneﬁted from the 50-
fold OOD test set cross-validation experiments as it improved over its
baseline performance in the MatBench study on three targets - LOCO
(14.09%), SparseYcluster (12.26%), and SparseYsingle (20.23%), while
ALIGNN and DeeperGATGNN only managed to improve for the Spar-
seYsingle targets (27.14%, and 18.53%, respectively).
The OOD test set comparison with the MatBench baseline results of
each algorithmon the elasticity and perovskites datasetare shown in Fig. 6b,
and 6c, respectively. We again limited the maximum value of y-axis to 1 for
both these ﬁgures for better visualization. On both these datasets, MEGNet,
SchNet, DimeNet++, coGN, and coNGN proved to be much worse that
their baseline prediction settings. This wasevidentfrom the resultsof Tables
4 and 5 as all of the SOTA OOD results on these datasets were achieved by
either CGCNN, ALIGNN, or DeeperGATGNN. On the elasticity dataset,
CGCNN improved over its baseline MAE for all OOD target sets (LOCO:
34.65%, SparseXcluster: 44.24%, SparseYcluster: 15.98%, SparseXsingle:
0.01%, SparseYsingle: 6.18%), while it failed to improve over its baseline
performance on the perovskites dataset for any type of OOD targets.
ALIGNNandDeeperGATGNN’sOODresultsarebetterthantheirbaseline
results for only the SparseYcluster targets (11.75%, and 5%, respectively),
and SparseYsingle targets (37.05%, and 10.65%, respectively) on the elas-
ticitydataset.However,theyonlysucceededinimprovingovertheirbaseline
MAEs for the SparseXsingle targets (15.68%, and 10.21%, respectively). In
contrast, all other models performed signiﬁcantly worse than these three on
both datasets.
Our 50-fold cross-validation scenario is a much more complex chal-
lenge for the current GNN algorithms than the scenario presented in the
MatBench Study because of the OOD test sets for each fold rather than the
i.i.d. test sets from random splitting as used in Matbench. Despite this, three
algorithms’ success in outperforming their baseline results for multiple
targetsproved the robustness of their inherent prediction capabilities. It also
manifested the lack of reliability of the material property prediction
Fig. 6 | Performance comparison of different GNN models’ MAEs vs corre-
sponding baseline MatBench i.i.d MAEs. Performance comparison of different
GNN models’ MAEs for all ﬁve different types of OOD targets with their baseline
i.i.d. MAEs found in the MatBench study on the (a) dielectric dataset, (b) elasticity
dataset, and (c) perovskites dataset. The baseline MAE for each algorithm is labeled.
All the models on average achieved higher MAEs than their baseline i.i.d. MAEs
which proved the inadequacy of current GNN models for OOD materials property
prediction.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-024-01316-4
Article
npj Computational Materials |  (2024) 10:144
9


--- PAGE 10 ---
performanceof currentGNNsreported intheMatBenchstudyasindicators
of their effectiveness in real-world materials property prediction, especially
for those obscure materials that researchers desire.
Physical insights
We utilized t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE)64, a
commonly utilized non-linear method for visualizing and interpreting
complex, high-dimensional data, to investigate speciﬁc insights into the
materials’ physics. t-SNE aims to reduce higher-dimensional data into a
much lower dimension (typically 2D or 3D) while preserving the proximity
of data points in both dimensions. We selected the perovskites formation
energy dataset for training. We also only investigated CGCNN, ALIGNN,
DeeperGATGNN, coGN, and coNGN for this experiment - the ﬁrst three
models for their comparatively robust OOD prediction performance on
average across all ﬁve targets on this dataset and the last two for their SOTA
performance in the current MatBench leaderboard37. Our objective is to
visualize the distribution of latent representations learned through the
training of different models. Foreach trained model,we retrieved the output
of theﬁrst layer aftertheﬁnalgraph convolutionlayerand plotted the t-SNE
diagrams in Fig. 7.
The t-SNE diagrams portray integrated latent spaces that combine
structure and composition information for the materials that have been
trained.Variouscolorscorrespondtodifferentlevelsofformationenergyfor
the samples representedin those latent spaces. We noticedthat each of these
GNNs is capable of producing effective representations that result in the
clustering of materials with similar formation energies. Within each cluster,
it can be anticipated that points will exhibit resemblances in both their
atomic conﬁgurations and elemental compositions. While each model may
produce distinct latent spaces, we can gain valuable insights into their
prediction patterns by examining these clusters. For example, we observed
thatcoGNandcoNGNhavesimilarpatternsintheirlatentspaceswhichcan
explain their similar OOD benchmark results(see Table 5). Also, we can see
that the lower and higher energy distribution overlaps in the latent spacesof
coGN and coNGN are very high. We can hardly separate different colored
regions in their latent spaces, whereas the same separation is much
smootherinCGCNN,ALIGNN,andDeeperGATGNN.Thismightexplain
the better OOD performances of CGCNN, ALIGNN, and Dee-
perGATGNN, and substandard OOD performances of coGN and coNGN
for all categories of OOD targets on average on the perovskites dataset.
Discussion
Our benchmark study aimed to systematically evaluate the performance of
eight GNN models in the challenging task of structure-based OOD mate-
rials property prediction and identify models that exhibit superior OOD
prediction performance while understanding the factors contributing to
their efﬁcacy. The motivation behind this work stems from the fact that
material researchers are typically drawn to exploring novel materials with
exceptional properties and unconventional compositions or structures,
which presents a common difﬁcultyin current ML techniques known as the
OOD prediction problem. Through rigorous experimentation, we found
that no single algorithm achievedSOTA performance for all OODtarget set
generation methods for a given dataset, let alone on all datasets.
First, to ensure a fair and comprehensive evaluation, we subjected each
of the three chosen datasets from the MatBench study to a systematic
divisioninto50folds.Thisdivisionprocesswasconductedusingﬁvedistinct
target set generation methods, resulting in a total of 250 folds across the
three datasets. Notably, within each fold, the test samples were methodically
drawn to be OOD from the remaining dataset using a strategic approach
based on predeﬁned criteria. These posed a strong challenge for the GNNs
chosen in this study as they were not only tasked with performing effectively
on the challenging OOD test samples but also with demonstrating effec-
tiveness across the entirety of the 50-fold cross-validation setup, under-
scoring the robustness and adaptability required for this comprehensive
assessment. In total, we trained a total of 6000 deep learning GNN models,
analyzed the results and drew important conclusions from them. So, with
respect to the amount of work done, our conclusions and remarks have a
high amount of credibility.
Second, we found that no single algorithm triumphed in all situations
which indicated their lack of generalization capability across different
datasets and unreliability in making real-world materials property predic-
tion. However, CGCNN, ALIGNN, and DeeperGATGNN proved to be
more robust than other algorithms, and coGN and coNGN only for the
dielectric targets. CGCNN excelled in certain OOD scenarios due to its
rudimentary nature. This achievement is particularly signiﬁcant given that
CGCNN outperformed both coGN and coNGN for most of the OOD
targets, which currently hold the SOTA performance for the majority of
tasks in the MatBench leaderboard. While cutting-edge GNNs often strive
for optimal results on speciﬁc datasets, they risk getting prone to overﬁtting
to these speciﬁc datasets or types of material data. CGCNN’s simplistic and
primitivearchitectureovercomesthisproblembyofferingasigniﬁcantlyless
complex model compared to other SOTA GNNs, such as SchNet. This
makes CGCNN more challenging to overﬁt, as the likelihood of overﬁtting
tends to increase with the number of parameters in a deep neural network
model. But in some cases, having a larger model with more parameters
might be necessary to capture intricate patterns in complex material data,
which becomes a trade-off for CGCNN in performance on both the Mat-
Bench study and our OOD study. As a result, it trailed ALIGNN and
DeeperGATGNN (which have more training parameters and better
Fig. 7 | Formation energy distribution of per-
ovskites materials in the latent space. t-SNE dia-
grams for (a) CGCNN, (b) ALIGNN, (c)
DeeperGATGNN, (d) coGN, and (e) coNGN were
plotted after training with the perovskites dataset
and retrieving latent representation of the ﬁrst layer
after the ﬁnal graph convolution layer. Different
colors indicate different formation energy levels in
the latent space, where each point represents a
separate perovskite material. CGCNN, ALIGNN,
and DeeperGATGNN have much smoother clusters
compared to coGN and coNGN, where different
colored clusters are hardly separable.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-024-01316-4
Article
npj Computational Materials |  (2024) 10:144
10


--- PAGE 11 ---
architectures)withtheincreasingnumberofmaterialsinotherdatasets.The
key to ALIGNN’s remarkable performance lies in its distinctive line graph
encoding strategy, which enables the utilization of triplet features that
effectively capture long-range interactions between atoms. Moreover, the
incorporation of two levels of edge-gated convolutions in updating both
node and edge features also plays a pivotal role in its SOTA performance on
the elasticity dataset on average. However, DeeperGATGNN claimed the
SOTA performance on average on the largest dataset (perovskites), as both
ALIGNN and CGCNN suffered from over-smoothing (a phenomenon that
makes GNN node features almost similar after a certain graph convolution
layer). DeeperGATGNN evades this issue by incorporating differentiable
group normalization and residual skip-connections, which allows it to use >
50 graph convolution layers to extract deeper-level features from the
encoded materials graphs. Despite all this, no single algorithm dominated
for all types of OOD targets, which necessitates new methods such as
domain adaptation, or meta-learning to improve the ML OOD prediction
performance.
The best GNN models in the MatBench study, namely coGN and
coNGN,
demonstrated
underperformance
than
ALIGNN,
Dee-
perGATGNN, and CGCNN on average, but performed better than the rest
of the GNNs (MEGNet, DimeNet++, and SchNet). However, they
achieved the SOTA performances on three out of 15 OOD targets (all of
them on the dielectric clusters). The overall OOD prediction inadequacy of
these models demonstrates that their SOTA performances in the MatBench
leaderboard seem to be largely due to the overﬁtting of the speciﬁc datasets’
folds. It is peculiar that despite leveraging line graphs to utilize angle
information, the results of coGN and coNGN are not as competitive as
ALIGNN for OOD prediction. By delving into the physical latent spaces of
thesemodelsfortheperovskitesdataset,weidentiﬁedthatthet-SNEclusters
of coGN and coNGN are very overlapping in terms of property ranges (see
Fig. 7), which indicates their higher MAE on this dataset. Also, the effect of
nested line graph (coNGN) is almost non-existent as its performance
compared to coGN differs by only ≈0.002% only among datasets for dif-
ferent targets, which raisesthe question about the impactof nesting withthe
non-nested version (coGN) for OOD targets. SchNet and DimeNet++ are
primarily designed for molecular property prediction which can be
accounted for their subpar performance on both the MatBench leaderboard
and our OOD prediction benchmark. Moreover, MEGNet has the most
number of parameters among all the GNNs selected, making it the most
prone to overﬁtting.
Through a thorough examination, we also observed a noteworthy
trend across all datasets and target generation methods: the performance of
each algorithm for such OODtest sets is consistently lower than those of the
baselines established in the MatBench study, except for a few cases (see Fig.
6). This collective underperformance demonstrated that traditional GNN
models are not robust enough to handle OOD property prediction yet. This
empirical evidence necessitates incorporating enhanced robustness meth-
ods in these algorithms, such as domain adaptation, or federated learning.
Other methods like adversarial learning or active learning can also be uti-
lized. Moreover, physics informed GNNs can be another promising direc-
tion fordevelopinga modelsuitable for OOD prediction. Especially, current
GNNs’ node and edge embeddings, updated with more physics-based
information can be used to devise a better model for OOD cases. Surpris-
ingly, both ALIGNN and DeeperGATGNN performed better than their
baseline results for the SparseYsingle OOD test sets on all datasets. In fact,
other GNN algorithms also had the least performance degradation in
making predictions for this method compared to the other four. In contrast,
the SparseXsingle targets caused all the algorithms the highest performance
degradation on average. Moreover, Fig. 3, and Supplementary Fig. 2 and 3
showed that only a few clusters/samples are extremely difﬁcult to predict,
which leads to the high variation of the model’s prediction performance. As
these partitions are done based on the structure x, or property y values of the
t-SNEof theOFMfeaturespace,thiscanbeagoodresearchdirectiontoﬁnd
out the opposite physical relation of both directions values to design a more
robust GNN. Of course, the main research goal of this work is to design
highly robust GNN algorithms that achieve high-performance predictions
on unknown outlier materials. The unexpected resilience displayed by
CGCNN,ALIGNN,andDeeperGATGNNinafewcasescanbeapromising
research direction to investigate further for this endeavor.
Methods
State-of-the-art (SOTA) algorithms for structure-based material
property prediction
We have chosen to evaluate the OOD performance for the following top
structure-based material property algorithms, as reported in the MatBench
study26. They are all based on graph neural networks (GNNs) with different
properties.
CGCNN. CGCNN, proposed by Xie and Grossman1, is the earliest known
GNN for the materials property prediction problem. After converting the
crystals into crystal graphs and other preprocessing steps, CGCNN
serially applies N graph convolutional layers and L1 hidden layers to the
input crystal graph which results in a new graph with each node repre-
senting the local environment of each atom. Following the pooling
operation, a vector representing the entire crystal is linked to L2 hidden
layers and subsequently connected to the output layer to generate
predictions.
The lth convolutional layer updates the node feature of the ith atom vi
througha processof convolutioninvolvingneighboringatomsandbondsof
atom i using a nonlinear graph convolution function as given below:
vðlþ1Þ
i
¼ ϕðvðlÞ
i ; vðlÞ
j ; eði;jÞkÞ
ð1Þ
In Eq. (1), eði;jÞk denotes the edge feature of the kth bond connecting
atom i and atom j, and ϕ denotes the convolution operator.
MEGNet.MEGNet (Chenet al.2) ﬁrstperforms the preprocessing steps to
convert the input into graph embedding consisting of node and edge
vectors. After that, N MEGNet layers are applied, which include two
dense layers, followed by the graph convolution operation. Next, a
readout method is applied to combine sets of atomic and bond vectors
into a single vector, followed by several size-reducing dense layers to
ﬁnally produce the single-valued prediction.
The convolution operator can be deﬁned as follows:
e0
i;j ¼ ϕeðvi  vj  ei;jÞ
ð2Þ
v0
i ¼ ϕv
1
N ðiÞ
X
j2N ðiÞ
ei;j
0
@
1
A  vi
0
@
1
A
ð3Þ
In Eq. (2), and Eq. (3), vi denotes the node representation for node i, ei,j
denotestheedgerepresentationbetweennodei,and j,v0
i,ande0
i;j denotesthe
updated node representation and edge representation, respectively, N i
denotes nodei’s neighborhood, ϕe, and ϕv denote the edge update function,
and the node update function, respectively, and ⊕denotes the concatena-
tion operator.
SchNet. Schütt et al.65 developed SchNet for molecules which can also be
applied to crystalline solids. It ﬁrst creates the embeddings for graphs
from the input materials and then applies N interaction blocksto it, which
includes the graph convolutions operation. After that, an atom-wise (a
recurring building block applied separately to the node vectors) layer
(reduces feature size), and a shifted softplus operation is applied. The
ﬁnal output is generated after applying another size-reducing atom-wise
layer and a sum pooling operation.
The convolution operator can be deﬁned as follows:
v0
i ¼
X
j2N ðiÞ
vj°ϕðei;jÞ
ð4Þ
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-024-01316-4
Article
npj Computational Materials |  (2024) 10:144
11


--- PAGE 12 ---
In Eq. (4), vi denotes the node representation for node i, ei,j denotes the
edge representation between node i, and j, v0
i, N i denotes node i’s neigh-
borhood, and ϕ denotes the convolution operator.
DimeNet++. DimeNet++, developed by Gasteiger et al.66 is a faster and
improved version of the previously proposed DimeNet27 primarily for
molecular property prediction. DimeNet++ takes a different approach
than traditional GNNs for this task by embedding and updating the
messages between atoms (mji). This allows DimeNet++ to incorporate
directional information, considering bond angles (α(kj, ji)), in addition to
interatomic distances dji. DimeNet++ goes further by jointly embedding
distances and angles using a spherical 2D Fourier-Bessel basis. The fol-
lowing equation updates messages between atoms mji:
mðlþ1Þ
ji
¼ ϕ
mðlÞ
ji ;
X
k2N jnfig
f int mðlÞ
kj ; eðjiÞ
RBF; aðkj;jiÞ
SBF


0
@
1
A
ð5Þ
In Eq. (5), N i denotes node i’s neighborhood, fint denotes the inter-
action function, eðjiÞ
RBF denotes the radial basis function representation of dji,
and aðkj;jiÞ
SBF
denotes the spherical basis function representation of dkj
and α(kj, ji).
ALIGNN. In the prepossessing step, ALIGNN (Choudhary and DeCost3)
converts a crystal to a crystal graph as done in CGCNN, and calculates
node and edge features and other required processing. Moreover, it
creates a line graph of the original graph to incorporate the angle feature
between bonds. ALIGNN ﬁrst applies edge-gated graph convolution on
the line graph, and utilizes the edge representation and triplet repre-
sentation features concerning the angle between the edge pairs) from
layer l to update the triplet representation, and bond messages of layer
l + 1. The updated bond messages from layer l + 1 are passed to the next
stage where they are incorporated with the original graph and the node
representation from layer l. Then through a second edge-gated graph
convolution, the node and the edge representation of layer l + 1 are
calculated. The equations for updating the node and the edge features are
given below:
uðlþ1Þ; tðlþ1Þ ¼ ϕegðLðGÞ; eðlÞ; tðlÞÞ
ð6Þ
vðlþ1Þ; eðlþ1Þ ¼ ϕegðG; vðlÞ; uðlþ1ÞÞ
ð7Þ
In Eq. (6), and Eq. (7), u(l), t(l), v(l), and e(l) denotes the bond message
representation, triplet representation, node representation, and edge
representation, respectively, of layer l, and ϕeg denotes the edge-gated graph
convolution operator.
DeeperGATGNN. Omee et al.4 developed the global attention-based
GNN model DeeperGATGNN which essentially overcame the over-
smoothing issue of GNNs (where with the increase of graph convolution
layers, all the node feature vectors of the graph eventually update to the
same vector) with the inclusion of differentiable group normalization
(DGN)67 and skip-connections68, and can go beyond >50 layers. The
process begins with an initial graph-encoded material serving as the
input. Following this, multiple Augmented Graph Attention (AGAT)
layers, each containing 64 neurons, and a DGN (Dynamic Graph Net-
work) are utilized. There is a skip connection from the output of the l-th
AGAT layer to the output of the (l + 1)-th AGAT layer, implemented
post-DGN application. Subsequently, a global attention layer is intro-
duced, where the node feature vectors are merged with the composition
encoded vector. These are then processed through two fully connected
layers, resulting in a context vector that encapsulates weights associated
with the positions of each node. This context vector is then combined
with the node feature vectors, followed by a global pooling of these
vectors. The node features undergo further processing through one or
two hidden layers, and ﬁnally, the output property is generated through
an additional fully connected layer.
The local soft-attention αi,j between a node i and its neighbor j can be
represented by the following rule:
αi;j ¼
expðai;jÞ
P
k2N i expðai;kÞ
ð8Þ
In equation (8), N i denotes the node i’s neighborhood, and ai,j denotes the
weight coefﬁcient between nodesi and j, indicatingthe signiﬁcance of node j
concerning node i. The global attention gi, employed just before global
pooling, computes the overall importance of each node. It can be expressed
by the following equation:
gi ¼
ðxi k EÞ  W
P
xc2Xðxc k EÞ  W
ð9Þ
In equation (9), x 2 RF denotes a learned embedding, E denotes a com-
positional vector of the crystal, W 2 R1 × ðFþjEjÞ denotes a parameterized
matrix, and xc denotes the learned embedding of any atom c within the
crystal.
coGN and coNGN. coGN and coNGN (Ruff et al.36) use the basic GNN
framework of Battaglia et al.69, where a single GNN layer is deﬁned by a
graph network (GN) block responsible for converting a generic graph
with edge, node, and global graph attributes using three update functions
ϕ and three aggregation functions ρ. For the original material encoded
graph G, a line graph L(G) is constructed, so that there is an edge eLðGÞ
eij;ejk for
every two incident edges eij, ejk in G (referring to the angle information
between those two edges). Each nested GN block (total T such blocks are
applied) takes the edge features xE, node features xV, graph level features
xG, and the encoded graph G itself as the input and outputs the updated
node representation x0
V, updated edge representation x0
E, updated graph
level representation x0
G, and the graph G. The edge, node, and graph level
representation update operations of coGN are given below:
x0
eij ¼ ϕEðxeij; xvi; xvj; xGÞ
ð10Þ
x0
vi ¼ ϕVðxvi; ^xvi; xGÞ
ð11Þ
x0
G ¼ ϕGðxG; ^xG; ~xGÞ
ð12Þ
In Eq. (10), (11), and (12), xeij denotes the edge representation of edge eij
between node i, and j, xvi denotes the node representation of node i, ^xvi
denotes the local edge aggregated representation of node i, x0
vi denotes the
updated node representation of node i, ^xG denotes the node aggregated
representation of graph G, and ~xG denotes the global edge aggregated
representation of graph G. In the nested version (coNGN), the edge update
is further continued by incorporating the angle information (x∠) from the
line graph L(G) using the following equation:
; x0
E; ;
¼ GN  Block ðxﬀ; x0
E; xG; LðGÞÞ
ð13Þ
Evaluation criterion
We use the mean absolute error (MAE) metric, which is a standard eva-
luation criterion for regression-based materials property prediction pro-
blems. MAE can be calculated by the following equation:
MAE ¼ 1
n
X
n
i¼1
∣yi  ^yi∣
ð14Þ
In Eq. (14), yi denotes the ground true property values, ^yi denotes the
predicted property values, and n denotes the number of data points in the
dataset.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-024-01316-4
Article
npj Computational Materials |  (2024) 10:144
12


--- PAGE 13 ---
Data availability
All three datasets are chosen from the MatBench study26. Details about the
datasets with 50-fold OOD splits can be found at https://github.com/
sadmanomee/OOD_Materials_Benchmark.
Code availability
The source codes of the GNN algorithms and the OOD target generation
methods’ code can be found at https://github.com/sadmanomee/OOD_
Materials_Benchmark.
Received: 19 January 2024; Accepted: 5 June 2024;
References
1.
Xie, T. & Grossman, J. C. Crystal graph convolutional neural networks
for an accurate and interpretable prediction of material properties.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 145301 (2018).
2.
Chen, C., Ye, W., Zuo, Y., Zheng, C. & Ong, S. P. Graph networks as a
universal machine learning framework for molecules and crystals.
Chem. Mater. 31, 3564–3572 (2019).
3.
Choudhary, K. & DeCost, B. Atomistic line graph neural network for
improved materials property predictions. Npj Comput. Mater. 7,
185 (2021).
4.
Omee, S. S. et al. Scalable deeper graph neural networks for high-
performance materials property prediction. Patterns 3, 100491 (2022).
5.
Yan, K., Liu, Y., Lin, Y. & Ji, S. Periodic graph transformers for crystal
material property prediction. Adv. Neural. Inf. Process. Syst. 35,
15066–15080 (2022).
6.
Wang, A. Y.-T., Kauwe, S. K., Murdock, R. J. & Sparks, T. D.
Compositionally restricted attention-based network for materials
property predictions. Npj Comput. Mater. 7, 77 (2021).
7.
Goodall, R. E. & Lee, A. A. Predicting materials properties without
crystal structure: deep representation learning from stoichiometry.
Nat. Commun. 11, 6280 (2020).
8.
Cheng, G., Gong, X.-G. & Yin, W.-J. Crystal structure prediction by
combining graph network and optimization algorithm. Nat. Commun.
13, 1492 (2022).
9.
Omee, S. S., Wei, L., Hu, M. & Hu, J. Crystal structure prediction using
neural network potential and age-ﬁtness pareto genetic algorithm. J.
Mater. Inf. 4, 2 (2024).
10. Hu, J. et al. Deep learning-based prediction of contact maps and
crystal structures of inorganic materials. ACS Omega 8,
26170–26179 (2023).
11. Qi, H. et al. Latent conservative objective models for ofﬂine data-
driven crystal structure prediction. In: ICLR 2023 Workshop on
Machine Learning for Materials (2023).
12. Wang, J. et al. MAGUS: machine learning and graph theory assisted
universal structure searcher. Natl. Sci. Rev. 10, nwad128 (2023).
13. Merchant, A. et al. Scaling deep learning for materials discovery.
Nature 624, 80–85 (2023).
14. Yang, S. et al. Scalable diffusion for materials generation. In:
International Conference on Learning Representations (2024).
15. Zhao, Y. et al. High-throughput discovery of novel cubic crystal
materials using deep generative neural networks. Adv. Sci. 8,
2100566 (2021).
16. Zhao, Y. et al. Physics guided deep learning for generative design of
crystal materials with symmetry constraints. Npj Comput. Mater. 9,
38 (2023).
17. Fanourgakis, G. S., Gkagkas, K., Tylianakis, E. & Froudakis, G. E. A
universal machine learning algorithm for large-scale screening of
materials. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 142, 3814–3822 (2020).
18. Ojih, J., Rodriguez, A., Hu, J. & Hu, M. Screening outstanding
mechanical properties and low lattice thermal conductivity using
global attention graph neural network. Energy AI 14, 100286 (2023).
19. Zunger, A. Inverse design in search of materials with target
functionalities. Nat. Rev. Chem. 2, 0121 (2018).
20. Han, S. et al. Design of new inorganic crystals with the desired
composition using deep learning. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 63,
5755–5763 (2023).
21. Seko, A., Hayashi, H., Nakayama, K., Takahashi, A. & Tanaka, I.
Representation of compounds for machine-learning prediction of
physical properties. Phys. Rev. B 95, 144110 (2017).
22. Ward, L., Agrawal, A., Choudhary, A. & Wolverton, C. A general-
purpose machine learning framework for predicting properties of
inorganic materials. Npj Comput. Mater. 2, 1–7 (2016).
23. Ward, L. et al. Matminer: An open source toolkit for materials data
mining. Comput. Mater. Sci. 152, 60–69 (2018).
24. Fung, V., Zhang, J., Juarez, E. & Sumpter, B. G. Benchmarking graph
neural networks for materials chemistry. Npj Comput. Mater. 7,
1–8 (2021).
25. Hu, J. et al. MaterialsAtlas.org: a materials informatics web app
platform for materials discovery and survey of state-of-the-art. Npj
Comput. Mater. 8, 65 (2022).
26. Dunn, A., Wang, Q., Ganose, A., Dopp, D. & Jain, A. Benchmarking
materials property prediction methods: the Matbench test set and
Automatminer reference algorithm. Npj Comput. Mater. 6,
138 (2020).
27. Gasteiger, J., Groß, J. & Günnemann, S. Directional message passing
for molecular graphs. In: International Conference on Learning
Representations (2019).
28. Gasteiger, J., Becker, F. & Günnemann, S. Gemnet: Universal
directional graph neural networks for molecules. Adv. Neural. Inf.
Process. Syst. 34, 6790–6802 (2021).
29. Reiser, P. et al. Graph neural networks for materials science and
chemistry. Commun. Mater. 3, 93 (2022).
30. Louis, S.-Y. et al. Graph convolutional neural networks with global
attention for improved materials property prediction. Phys. Chem.
Chem. Phys. 22, 18141–18148 (2020).
31. Kong, S. et al. Density of states prediction for materials discovery via
contrastive learning from probabilistic embeddings. Nat. Commun.
13, 949 (2022).
32. Cong, G. & Fung, V. Improving materials property predictions for
graph neural networks with minimal feature engineering. Mach.
Learn.: Sci. Technol. 4, 035030 (2023).
33. Xiao, J., Yang, L. & Wang,S. Graphisomorphism networkfor materials
property prediction along with explainability analysis. Comput. Mater.
Sci. 233, 112619 (2024).
34. Xiong, Z. et al. Evaluating explorative prediction power of machine
learningalgorithmsfor materialsdiscoveryusing k-foldforward cross-
validation. Comput. Mater. Sci. 171, 109203 (2020).
35. Varivoda, D., Dong, R., Omee, S. S. & Hu, J. Materials property
prediction with uncertainty quantiﬁcation: a benchmark study. Appl.
Phys. Rev. 10 (2023).
36. Ruff,R., Reiser, P., Stühmer,J. & Friederich, P. Connectivityoptimized
nested line graph networks for crystal structures. Digit. Discov. 3,
694–601 (2024).
37. Matbench leaderboard. https://matbench.materialsproject.
org/ (2021).
38. Hu, J., Liu, D., Fu, N. & Dong, R. Realistic material property prediction
using domain adaptation based machine learning. Digit. Discov. 3,
300–312 (2024).
39. Bergerhoff, G., Hundt, R., Sievers, R. & Brown, I. The inorganic crystal
structure data base. J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci. 23, 66–69 (1983).
40. Jain, A. et al. Commentary: The Materials Project: a materials genome
approach to accelerating materials innovation. APL Mater.1 (2013).
41. Kirklin, S. et al. The open quantum materials database (OQMD):
assessing the accuracy of dft formation energies. Npj Comput. Mater.
1, 1–15 (2015).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-024-01316-4
Article
npj Computational Materials |  (2024) 10:144
13


--- PAGE 14 ---
42. Curtarolo, S. et al. AFLOW: An automatic framework for high-
throughput materials discovery. Comput. Mater. Sci. 58,
218–226 (2012).
43. Li, K. et al. Exploiting redundancy in large materials datasets for
efﬁcient machine learning with less data. Nat. Commun. 14,
7283 (2023).
44. Li,K.,DeCost,B.,Choudhary,K.,Greenwood,M.&Hattrick-Simpers,J.A
criticalexaminationofrobustnessandgeneralizabilityofmachinelearning
prediction of materials properties. Npj Comput. Mater. 9, 55 (2023).
45. Meredig, B. et al. Can machine learning identify the next high-
temperature superconductor? Examining extrapolation performance
for materials discovery. Mol. Syst. Des. Eng. 3, 819–825 (2018).
46. Wenzel, F. et al. Assaying out-of-distribution generalization in transfer
learning. Adv. Neural. Inf. Process. Syst. 35, 7181–7198 (2022).
47. Wang, J. et al. Generalizing to unseen domains: a survey on domain
generalization. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 35, 8052–8072 (2022).
48. Shen, Z. et al. Towards out-of-distribution generalization: a survey.
Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.13624 (2021).
49. Schölkopf, B. et al. Toward causal representation learning.
Proceedings of the IEEE 109, 612–634 (2021).
50. Wilson, G. & Cook, D. J. A survey of unsupervised deep domain
adaptation. ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol. (TIST) 11, 1–46 (2020).
51. Schrier, J., Norquist, A. J., Buonassisi, T. & Brgoch, J. In pursuit of the
exceptional: Researchdirectionsfor machinelearningin chemical and
materials science. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 145, 21699–21716 (2023).
52. Yang, J. et al. OpenOOD: benchmarking generalized out-of-
distribution detection. Adv. Neural. Inf. Process. Syst. 35,
32598–32611 (2022).
53. Gui, S., Li, X., Wang, L. & Ji, S. GOOD: a graph out-of-distribution
benchmark. Adv. Neural. Inf. Process. Syst. 35, 2059–2073 (2022).
54. Koh, P. W. et al. WILDS: A benchmark of in-the-wild distribution shifts.
In: International Conference on Machine Learning, 5637–5664
(PMLR, 2021).
55. Shimakawa, H., Kumada, A. & Sato, M. Extrapolative prediction of
small-data molecular property using quantum mechanics-assisted
machine learning. Npj Comput. Mater. 10, 11 (2024).
56. Kauwe, S. K., Graser, J., Murdock, R. & Sparks, T. D. Can machine
learning ﬁnd extraordinary materials? Comput. Mater. Sci. 174,
109498 (2020).
57. Chanussot, L. et al. Open catalyst 2020 (OC20) dataset and
community challenges. ACS Catal. 11, 6059–6072 (2021).
58. Tran, R. et al. The open catalyst 2022 (OC22) dataset and challenges
for oxide electrocatalysts. ACS Catal. 13, 3066–3084 (2023).
59. Choudhary, K. & Sumpter, B. G. Can a deep-learning model make fast
predictions of vacancy formation in diverse materials?AIP Adv.
13 (2023).
60. Bengio, Y. & Grandvalet, Y. No unbiased estimator of the variance of
k-fold cross-validation. Adv. Neural. Inf. Process. Syst. 16 (2003).
61. Lloyd, S. Least squares quantization in PCM. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory.
28, 129–137 (1982).
62. Pham, T. L. et al. Machine learning reveals orbital interaction in
materials. Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater. 18, 756 (2017).
63. Karamad, M. et al. Orbital graph convolutional neural network for
material property prediction. Phys. Rev. Mater. 4, 093801 (2020).
64. Van der Maaten, L. & Hinton, G. Visualizing data using t-SNE.J. Mach.
Learn. Res. 9 (2008).
65. Schütt, K. T., Sauceda, H. E., Kindermans, P.-J., Tkatchenko, A. &
Müller, K.-R. Schnet–a deep learning architecture for molecules and
materials. J. Chem. Phys. 148, 241722 (2018).
66. Gasteiger, J., Giri, S., Margraf, J. T. & Günnemann, S. Fast and
uncertainty-aware directional message passing for non-equilibrium
molecules. NeurIPS 2020 ML for Molecules Workshop (2020).
67. Zhou, K. et al. Towards deeper graph neural networks with
differentiable group normalization. Adv. Neural. Inf. Process. Syst. 33,
4917–4928 (2020).
68. He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S. & Sun, J. Deep residual learning for image
recognition. In: Proc. IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition 770–778 (2016).
69. Battaglia, P. W. et al. Relational inductive biases, deep learning, and
graph networks. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.
01261 (2018).
70. Petousis, I. et al. High-throughput screening of inorganic compounds
for the discovery of novel dielectric and optical materials. Sci. Data 4,
1–12 (2017).
71. De Breuck, P.-P., Hautier, G. & Rignanese, G.-M. Materials property
prediction for limited datasets enabled by feature selection and joint
learning with modnet. Npj Comput. Mater. 7, 83 (2021).
72. Castelli, I. E. et al. New cubic perovskites for one-and two-photon
water splitting using the computational materials repository. Energy
Environ. Sci. 5, 9034–9043 (2012).
Acknowledgements
TheresearchreportedinthisworkwassupportedinpartbyNationalScience
Foundation under the grants 2110033, OAC-2311203, and 2320292. The
views, perspectives, and content do not necessarily represent the ofﬁcial
views of the NSF.
Author contributions
Conceptualization, J.H.; methodology, S.O., J.H., N.F.; investigation, S.O.,
J.H., M.H.; software, S.O., N.F.; writing–original draft preparation, S.O., N.F.,
R.D., J.H.; writing–review and editing, S.O., N.F., R.D., M.H., J.H.;
visualization, S.O., N.F.; supervision, J.H. and M.H.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-024-01316-4.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Ming Hu or Jianjun Hu.
Reprints and permissions information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to
obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this
licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2024
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-024-01316-4
Article
npj Computational Materials |  (2024) 10:144
14
